.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Lee Harrington
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH PATHAUDIT 1 "2026-07-24" "pathaudit 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pathaudit \(em scan explicitly supplied PATH directory roots for hazards
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pathaudit
.RI [ \-\- ]
.I ROOT...
.P
.B pathaudit \-\-help
.P
.B pathaudit \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pathaudit
is a small ISO C17 command\-line scanner for risks in explicitly supplied
PATH directory entries.
It inspects only the operands named by the caller.
It never reads the
.B PATH
environment variable, searches for executables, walks directory contents, or
examines ancestor directories.
.P
One operand is one inspection root; duplicate operands remain distinct inputs.
Inspection is read\-only and requires no special privilege.
Classification uses the operand bytes and one
.BR stat (2) \-equivalent
lookup of the final target.
Ordering and escaping are byte\-oriented and locale\-independent.
.P
This narrow slice does not inspect packages, processes, services, capabilities,
ACLs, mount options, or ownership policy, and it performs no remediation,
networking, persistence, monitoring, or daemon work.
Filesystem state can change concurrently, so a result describes metadata
observed during that invocation and is not a security lock.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-
End option processing so a root may begin with
.BR \- .
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print the usage summary to standard output and exit with status
.BR 0 .
Extra operands are a usage error.
A stdout write or flush failure returns status
.BR 2 .
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print
.B pathaudit 0.1.0
to standard output and exit with status
.BR 0 .
Extra operands are a usage error.
A stdout write or flush failure returns status
.BR 2 .
.SH PATH HAZARDS
The closed hazard taxonomy for this slice is:
.TP
.B EMPTY_ROOT
The operand has zero bytes.
It is not translated to the current directory and receives no filesystem lookup.
.TP
.B RELATIVE_ROOT
The nonempty operand does not begin with
.BR / ,
including
.B .
and
.BR .. .
The operand is still looked up relative to the process working directory.
.TP
.B MISSING_ROOT
Target lookup reports
.B ENOENT
(including a dangling final symlink).
.TP
.B NON_DIRECTORY_ROOT
Lookup succeeds but the final target is not a directory, or lookup reports
.B ENOTDIR
because a component prevents directory resolution.
.B MISSING_ROOT
and
.B NON_DIRECTORY_ROOT
are mutually exclusive.
.TP
.B GROUP_WRITABLE
The final directory target has
.B S_IWGRP
set.
.TP
.B WORLD_WRITABLE
The final directory target has
.B S_IWOTH
set.
.P
Lookup follows symbolic links like
.BR stat (2) ;
a symlink is not itself a hazard.
Permission findings use only the final directory target's
.B st_mode
bits.
Missing and non\-directory roots receive no permission finding.
A directory with both group\- and world\-write bits produces both findings.
Sticky, set\-ID, execute, read, owner, ACL, credential, and mount\-policy state
neither suppress nor create a finding.
.P
Each finding is one stdout line:
.B CODE
, a TAB, a quoted escaped root, and a newline.
Findings are ordered by raw root bytes, then original operand position for
byte\-identical duplicates, then the fixed code rank above.
Every applicable code is emitted once per operand.
.P
Exit status
.B 0
means every root was inspected and no hazard was found.
Status
.B 1
means inspection completed and at least one hazard was emitted.
Status
.B 2
means usage failure, an input\-limit violation, a metadata error not classified
as a hazard (for example symlink loops or
.BR EACCES ),
allocation failure, or an output write/flush failure.
Limit and inspection failures are reject\-closed: buffered findings are
discarded and stdout remains empty.
.SH OUTPUT
Findings use the form
.BR CODE<TAB>"ESCAPED_ROOT" .
Inside the quotes, printable ASCII bytes
.B 0x20
through
.B 0x7e
are emitted literally except
.B "
and
.B \e
which become
.B \e"
and
.BR \e\e ;
every other byte is uppercase
.BR \exHH .
Diagnostics go only to stderr as
.B pathaudit: REASON
optionally followed by a quoted root.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Every root inspected; no hazard found.
Also used for successful
.B \-\-help
and
.BR \-\-version .
.TP
.B 1
Inspection completed; at least one hazard emitted.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error, limit violation, operational metadata error, allocation failure,
or stdout write/flush failure.
.SH RESOURCE LIMITS
.IP \(bu 3
Maximum roots: 65\|536.
.IP \(bu 3
Maximum root length: 65\|536 bytes excluding the terminating NUL.
.IP \(bu 3
Maximum aggregate root bytes including terminating NULs: 1\|048\|576.
.SH EXAMPLES
.RS
.nf
pathaudit /tmp
pathaudit \-\- \-dash-root
pathaudit /safe /group-writable /missing
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR stat (2),
.BR sysdiff (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Lee Harrington
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Lee Harrington.
.B pathaudit
is released under the MIT License.
.SH VERSION
pathaudit 0.1.0 (2026\-07\-24)
