.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Lee Harrington
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH SYSDIFF 1 "2026-07-10" "sysdiff 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sysdiff \(em compare explicit system snapshot files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sysdiff
.P
.B sysdiff \-\-help
.P
.B sysdiff \-\-version
.P
.B sysdiff compare
.I BEFORE_SNAPSHOT AFTER_SNAPSHOT
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sysdiff
compares two user\-provided plain\-text system snapshot files and prints a
deterministic, key\-sorted diff.
.P
It reads only the two paths named on the command line.
It does
.B not
inspect the live system, scan directories, call package or service managers,
persist snapshots, contact the network, or run background work.
.P
Invoked with no arguments, with
.BR \-\-help ,
or with
.BR \-\-version ,
.B sysdiff
prints usage or version information to standard output and exits successfully
unless a stdout write or flush failure occurs.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print the usage line to standard output and exit with status
.BR 0 .
A stdout write or flush failure returns status
.B 2
as described in
.BR "EXIT STATUS" .
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print
.B sysdiff 0.1.0
to standard output and exit with status
.BR 0 .
A stdout write or flush failure returns status
.B 2
as described in
.BR "EXIT STATUS" .
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI compare " BEFORE_SNAPSHOT AFTER_SNAPSHOT"
Compare two explicit snapshot files.
.I BEFORE_SNAPSHOT
is the earlier state;
.I AFTER_SNAPSHOT
is the later state.
.B sysdiff
reads only those two paths.
Diff output and the
.B no changes
result are described in
.BR OUTPUT ;
exit statuses are described in
.BR "EXIT STATUS" .
.SH SNAPSHOT FORMAT
Snapshot files are plain\-text byte streams with one
.B key=value
record per line.
.P
Line handling:
.IP \(bu 3
A line ends at
.B \en
or end of file.
A single trailing
.B \er
before
.B \en
is removed as part of the line ending.
.IP \(bu 3
A final line without a trailing newline is valid.
.IP \(bu 3
Empty lines, including lines made only of spaces and tabs, are ignored.
.IP \(bu 3
Lines whose first byte after leading spaces or tabs is
.B #
are whole\-line comments and are ignored.
Inline comments are not supported;
a
.B #
byte inside a key or value is data.
.P
Record rules:
.IP \(bu 3
The first
.B =
byte separates key from value.
The key must be non\-empty; the value may be empty.
Keys and values are not trimmed.
.IP \(bu 3
Duplicate keys within one snapshot are rejected.
.IP \(bu 3
Embedded NUL bytes are rejected.
.IP \(bu 3
Values are opaque byte strings after line\-ending removal and are compared
byte\-for\-byte.
.P
Valid format\-1 keys use only the bytes
.BR A\-Z ,
.BR a\-z ,
.BR 0\-9 ,
.BR . ,
.BR _ ,
.BR \- ,
and
.BR / .
A key must contain at least one
.B .\&
separator; must not contain spaces, tabs, or
.BR = ;
must not contain consecutive dots (\fB..\fP);
must not begin with
.BR / ;
and must not have a trailing
.B .
character.
Keys are case\-sensitive.
.P
A key in the
.B file.\&
namespace is snapshot data only.
.B sysdiff
does not open the named path.
.SH OUTPUT
All comparison output goes to standard output.
Diagnostics go to standard error.
No diff output is written until both snapshots are fully validated.
.P
Diff lines are sorted by key across the union of both snapshots using
bytewise, locale\-independent ordering.
Unchanged keys emit nothing.
.P
Removed record:
.P
.RS
.nf
\- key=old value
.fi
.RE
.P
Added record:
.P
.RS
.nf
+ key=new value
.fi
.RE
.P
Changed record:
.P
.RS
.nf
~ key: old value \-> new value
.fi
.RE
.P
Identical snapshots print exactly:
.P
.RS
.nf
no changes
.fi
.RE
.P
Each stdout line ends with a newline.
.P
Keys render unchanged.
Every value byte is rendered for display as printable ASCII:
bytes
.B 0x20
through
.B 0x7e
except backslash render literally; backslash renders as
.BR \e\e ;
every other byte renders as uppercase
.BR \exNN .
The same escaping applies to user\-controlled command arguments and paths in
diagnostics.
.P
The changed\-line delimiter
.RB \(lq\  \->\  \(rq
is human\-readable and not a reversible interchange format.
If a value itself contains that delimiter sequence, the displayed old/new
boundary is ambiguous.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success with no differences, or a successful informational command
.RB ( \-\-help ,
.BR \-\-version ,
or no\-argument usage).
.TP
.B 1
.B compare
succeeded and at least one difference was found.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error, file I/O error, malformed snapshot, duplicate key, allocation
failure, resource\-limit violation, stdout write/flush failure, unsafe input,
or other runtime error.
.P
On validation failures for
.BR compare ,
stdout is empty.
A stdout write or flush failure returns
.B 2
with a
.B stdout write error:
diagnostic (using
.B EIO
when errno is unset) and may leave partial stdout.
On Linux,
.B SIGPIPE
is ignored so a closed stdout pipe follows that same failure path as
.B EPIPE
rather than terminating the process.
.SH RESOURCE LIMITS
Per snapshot input:
.IP \(bu 3
Maximum line length: 65\|536 bytes after line\-ending removal.
.IP \(bu 3
Maximum entries: 65\|536.
.IP \(bu 3
Maximum total bytes read: 16\|777\|216, counting every byte including newlines,
comments, and blank lines.
.P
Exceeding a limit fails with exit status
.BR 2 ,
empty stdout, and a contextual diagnostic.
.SH SECURITY
Snapshot paths and file contents are untrusted.
.B sysdiff
opens exactly the two named files for reading.
It does not invoke a shell, expand globs, create or modify files, recurse
directories, or treat
.B file.\&
keys as filesystem paths to inspect.
.P
Untrusted value and path bytes are escaped for terminal\-safe rendering as
described in
.BR OUTPUT .
Raw ESC, control, DEL, or non\-ASCII bytes from snapshot values, paths, or
unknown commands do not reach stdout or stderr unescaped.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compare two temporary snapshot files:
.P
.RS
.nf
sysdiff compare /tmp/before.snap /tmp/after.snap
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR diff (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Lee Harrington
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Lee Harrington.
.B sysdiff
is released under the MIT License.
.SH VERSION
sysdiff 0.1.0 (2026\-07\-10)
